
The agreement makes unprecedented mention of the role of fossil fuels in the climate crisis. That's something that even the landmark Paris Agreement was unable to achieve. The Glasgow Climate Pact calls for the phasing down of unabated coal and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies.
The language was originally stronger but was watered down several times. It looked like it might even have been scrapped near the end when India, with Iran's support, made clear they wouldn't give their blessings on it. The pact requires all 197 parties to agree on the final text.
But at the 11th hour, India said it would accept the language with one tweak -- that coal should be phased "down," not phased "out," in what some observers see as a get out clause that would allow continued use of coal.
Humanity needs to ditch coal to save itself. It also needs to keep the lights on.
Humanity needs to ditch coal to save itself. It also needs to keep the lights on.
COP26 President Alok Sharma was seen canvassing opinion on the floor of the plenary room to see if others would support the change to essentially save the article.
When asked for her opinion on the whole agreement, even Greenpeace International Executive Director Jennifer Morgan saw the inclusion of coal as a win for the climate.
"It's meek, it's weak and the 1.5C goal is only just alive, but a signal has been sent that the era of coal is ending. And that matters," she said.
Sharma faced questions over the way he handled the last-minute change, for which he later apologized.
"This will not bring us closer to 1.5 but make it more difficult to reach it," said Swiss Environment Minister Simonetta Sommarug, receiving a long round of applause.
But Indian Environment Minister Bhupender Yadav, who had opposed the language, said that it would be difficult for his country to end coal use and fossil fuel subsidies while it tries to address poverty.
China surprises climate summit with pledge to work with US, but doesn&#39;t budge on climate goals
China surprises climate summit with pledge to work with US, but doesn't budge on climate goals
"How can anyone expect developing countries to make promises about phasing out coal and fossil fuel subsidies?" he asked.
"Subsidies provide much needed social security and support," he said, giving the example of how India uses subsidies to provide liquified natural gas to low-income households.